The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mentor: Furniture and its Makers, Vol.
1, Num. 30, Serial No. 30, by C. R. Richards

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Mentor: Furniture and its Makers, Vol. 1, Num. 30, Serial No. 30

Author: C. R. Richards

Release Date: September 7, 2015 [EBook #49904]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MENTOR: FURNITURE AND ITS MAKERS ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









The Mentor, No. 30, Furniture and its Makers




THE MENTOR

“A Wise and Faithful Guide and Friend”

    Vol. 1                      No. 30

FURNITURE AND ITS MAKERS

    CHARLES ANDRÉ BOULLE

    DANIEL MAROT

    J. HENRI RIESENER

    THOMAS CHIPPENDALE

    THOMAS SHERATON

    GEORGE HEPPELWHITE

[Illustration]

_By PROFESSOR C. R. RICHARDS Director of Cooper Union, New York._


It is rather surprising to find how late a development furniture is
in the modern sense. Up to the seventeenth century chairs were far
from common. Outside of the large and heavy armchairs reserved for the
head of the family, benches, chests, and stools were the only seats in
all but the wealthiest households. Before the sixteenth century fixed
tables were unusual. Dining tables were almost always composed of a
set of boards placed upon trestles at mealtime. Going a little further
back to the fourteenth century we find furniture, even in castles of
the nobility, of the scantiest and simplest. In the sleeping rooms the
pieces were limited to a bed, one or two chests, a bench before the
fireplace, and seats built into the wall, commonly under the windows.
In the hall where meals were served the only indispensable article
besides the trestle tables and benches was a dressoir or buffet for
the display of plate. All of these pieces were exceedingly heavy and
massive, and oftentimes built into the structure of the room. Not
until the seventeenth century did furniture become lighter, more easily
movable, and more comfortable. It was at this period that chairs began
to be made with sloping backs and furnished with cushioned seats of
leather or woven stuff.

[Illustration: LOUIS XIV CABINET

EXAMPLE OF BOULLE]

Every age has impressed its artistic standards strongly upon the
furniture of the period. Long after Gothic cathedral building had
ceased, the cabinetmakers of northern Europe continued to carve their
delicate window tracery upon the panels of chests and buffets and to
copy the moldings of pier and mullion.

[Illustration: FRENCH OR FLEMISH CABINET OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY]

The Renaissance brought a great change in the surface appearance of
furniture, and in Italy, France, Flanders, and Germany the new art
spirit manifested itself in different forms, each of which reflected
the peculiar genius of the people of the land.

But all the earlier developments in furniture were overshadowed by
the splendid achievements of French art in the latter part of the
seventeenth century. These began under Louis XIV, and continued with
undiminished productiveness and refinement of design through the reigns
of Louis XV and Louis XVI, to a decline under the Empire.


LOUIS XV--FURNITURE OF THE BOUDOIR

The foundation by Colbert, minister of Louis XIV, of the Manufactures
Royales des Meubles de la Couronne, commonly called the Gobelins,
brought together for the production of furniture and tapestry for the
royal palaces the most talented designers and expert craftsmen of the
time. Of these Charles André Boulle was the master cabinetmaker. His
name is commonly identified with marquetry of tortoise shell and
brass, which he carried to a high state of perfection; but he was much
more than a craftsman. He developed a furniture style that harmonized
perfectly in its vigor and magnificence with the splendid proportions
of the great royal residences. Large in scale and massive in
construction, his pieces rely for their effect upon bold and striking
decoration of gilded bronze and marquetry.

[Illustration: AN EXAMPLE OF RIESENER MARQUETRY

STYLE OF LOUIS XV]

Boulle’s pieces accord thoroughly with the years of pomp and splendor
of Le Grand Monarque; but even before the death of Louis a notable
change in the appearance of furniture set in. The nobility, whose
resources had been severely strained to maintain the splendor set by
the king, found it necessary to substitute smaller apartments for their
great rooms and galleries. Moreover, the heroic quality of the earlier
Louis XIV decorations was no longer suited to the growing softness
and effeminacy of the age. Smaller and more delicate furnishings were
demanded. The Louis XIV chairs had borrowed the high upholstered backs,
together with the S curves for arms and legs, from the Italians--later
on the bold _bombé_ curve appeared in the supports of the tables.
By the time of the Regency these outlines had become more slender
and refined and the reign of the curved line in furniture became
established,--a reign that lasted for fully half a century, during
which time some of the ablest masters of design that have ever lived
played and conjured with curves delicate and curves bold, now bringing
forth an outline pure and exquisite in quality, and again with amazing
inventiveness interlacing curve with curve in combinations of infinite
variety and bewildering richness.

Most Louis XV furniture develops naturally from that of Louis XIV, and
is built upon thoroughly structural lines. The reaction, however,
against severity and the increasing demand of a frivolous aristocracy
for new and more striking effects, gradually produced a style in which
decoration was often not subordinated to structure, but made an end in
itself.

[Illustration: LOUIS XV TABLE]

The rococo (from _rocaille_, rock, and _coquille_, shell) ran its
extravagant course with increasing exaggeration and license during the
first half of the reign of Louis XV; but it should not be thought of as
affecting all the furniture even of this period, for its manifestations
were mainly in the field of the carver and bronze worker, and the
outlines of furniture were very little influenced, except in the case
of the smaller and lighter pieces, such as console tables. About the
middle of the reign the limit of artistic license had been passed and
a reaction set in. The ormolu, which had reached excessive size and
had become overloaded on the surface, was withdrawn to the edges, and
made smaller and more suitable for the delicate proportions of the
pieces. In its place marquetry of beautiful colored woods, more or less
practised for over a century, was brought to a perfection never before
equaled.

[Illustration: LOUIS XV COMMODE]


LOUIS XVI--THE INFLUENCE OF THE CLASSIC

The reaction against the excesses of the rococo which had set in
as early as the middle of the eighteenth century continued to gain
strength during the next two decades, and to carry the design of
furniture farther and farther from the fashion of the early years of
Louis XV.

[Illustration: LOUIS XVI COMMODE]

The new impulse turned naturally to the straight contour. This meant
almost inevitably the adoption of classic lines. At first the change
showed itself in the straightened bodies of commodes, cabinets, and
writing tables, which still retained their curved supports. Finally the
legs themselves were made straight or rather tapering; until by the end
of the reign of Louis XV the curved outline had quite disappeared and
the style called Louis XVI was fairly launched.

[Illustration: LOUIS XVI TABLE]

The ormolu takes new forms. It is limited to the edges and to frames
of panels, to friezes, and to important centers, and follows the
classic spirit: not an outright imitation of Roman or Greek forms, but
a charming French interpretation of the antique. The designs of the
metal worker had never been more delicate, or his execution finer.
Delicacy and appropriateness of ornament, fineness of proportion, and
sobriety of treatment were the ideals of the new cabinetmakers. The
art of marquetry was still further advanced, and reached perhaps its
culminating expression in the fine examples of Riesener and Röntgen.

It was during this reign that mahogany began to be extensively and
almost exclusively used as a cabinet wood, in place of the walnut
previously employed. Where walnut was still used, as in the case of
chairs, it was generally gilded or enameled. The chair and the canape
or sofa stand out as among the most successful achievements of the
Louis XVI designers. Simple as to structural lines, their details were
worked out with scrupulous care and, from fluted tapering legs to the
carved frames inclosing the beautiful tapestry backs, they represent
extreme elegance and consistency of style.

Toward the end of the reign of Louis XVI the quality of furniture
design degenerated. Instead of charming adaptations and interpretations
of the classic spirit, mechanical imitations of Greek and Roman forms
appear, and heavy bronze caryatids overweigh and distort the outlines
of cabinets and tables. Dull heaviness takes the place of elegance and
the play of fertile invention. The decline had begun.

[Illustration: LOUIS XVI TABLE]


EMPIRE--THE IMITATION OF THE CLASSIC

[Illustration: EMPIRE ARMCHAIRS]

The new order, built on the overthrow of monarchical society and with
no sympathy for delicacy and refinement, desired a setting free from
the traditions of the past. The cabinetmakers, however, had only their
training of the reign of Louis XVI, and this they could not transcend.
For motives they had only their knowledge, or what they considered
knowledge, of the antique. On this they endeavored to build a new
style by direct adoption of classic forms. In chairs and couches they
attempted to reproduce the actual shape used by the Greeks and Romans.
Figures of caryatids and sphinxes take the place of simpler structural
supports in tables and stands.

Ormolu was no longer employed in an architectural manner in which one
decorative detail is set off against another in a play of rhythm and
contrast; but was applied as single figures or small ornamental motives
on a plain surface of mahogany. Oftentimes this ornament has so little
relation to the space decorated that it could well be omitted without
loss of real effectiveness. This enthusiasm for the antique passed
through Egyptian, Greek, and Roman phases. Heavy and unimaginative
as most of the Empire pieces seem, it can at least be said that they
are more consistent and satisfying than the inharmonious mixture that
characterized the furniture of the last year of Louis XVI. Many of the
Empire chairs indeed are of real dignity and beauty of proportion. In
some of these ormolu, introduced for the first time in chairs, was used
in combination with polished mahogany; but in most cases the woodwork
was sparingly carved with rosettes and enameled in white and gold. For
the coverings, silk brocade and appliqué in the prevailing colors of
yellow and red took the place of tapestry.

[Illustration: JEWEL CABINET OF MARIE LOUISE

LATE EMPIRE]

[Illustration: EMPIRE ARMCHAIR]

[Illustration: EMPIRE COMMODE]


CHIPPENDALE--THE MASTER OF LINE

[Illustration: CHIPPENDALE PIECRUST TABLE]

The French styles were the result of many designers working upon common
lines; but in England during the last half of the eighteenth century
certain noted individual cabinetmakers set the fashion, and for a
period of years the designs of Chippendale, Heppelwhite, and Sheraton
were each in turn recognized as the established vogue.

Thomas Chippendale began business in London on his own account about
1735, and evidently rapidly built up a very flourishing establishment,
inasmuch as the “Gentleman and Cabinet-maker’s Director,” which he
published in 1754, contains a wide variety of designs suitable only for
wealthy customers.

[Illustration: CHIPPENDALE SETTEE--FRETWORK]

The “Director” contains many designs that are fantastic, and many that
are difficult and even impossible to execute. Fortunately Chippendale’s
fame does not rest upon these designs, made to catch the eyes of his
richer patrons, but upon the pieces actually made, and it is refreshing
to see how much finer are these latter, evolved by the trained
craftsman, understanding every limitation and every possibility of his
material. Chippendale’s chairs represent by far the best expression
of his genius. Starting with the modified Dutch forms introduced by
William and Mary and Queen Anne, in which the _cabriole_ leg with
ball and claw feet and the flowing curved back with solid splat are
the prominent features, he soon developed an individual style marked
by great dignity, strength, and originality. His earliest chairs are
perhaps the finest. In these the _cabriole_ leg is always employed,
and the side frames of the back curve outward as they run up to more
or less pronounced ears at the top. The top rail takes more or less of
a cupid bow shape, and the central splat fills in the inclosed space.
It is in the design of these central splats and the inclosed framework
that Chippendale is at his best. The almost inexhaustible variety of
figure in these pierced and interlaced centers, always in the happiest
relation to the framework, gives the principal interest to these
chairs, and stamps Chippendale as one of the great masters of design.

[Illustration: CHIPPENDALE ARMCHAIR]

Chippendale’s styles represent many influences. His early work was
patterned closely upon Queen Anne models; but with the “Director”
appeared many examples of Gothic and fretted furniture. The Gothic,
unsuitable as it was for domestic use, obtained little vogue; but the
ornamentation of chairs and tables, either by open or, more commonly,
applied fretwork, was popular for a dozen years or more, and is
characteristic of some of Chippendale’s most successful if not most
showy productions.

During this same period a rage for things Chinese possessed the popular
taste, and in many latticed chair backs and canopied tops of cabinets
the versatile cabinetmaker catered to this new interest.

Besides his chairs, the name of Chippendale is closely associated with
the charming tripod tables, generally made with tilted top and often
with molded or “piecrust” border, with the flat card tables so much
used in the gaming of the period, and with the all-china cabinets and
bookcases with glass fronts, and oftentimes with a characteristic
broken pediment at the top.

The two other men who identified their names with English styles
worked under the influence of the classical revival brought about in
England largely by the influence of the brothers Adam. In the case of
Heppelwhite this influence greatly affected but did not absolutely
determine the style; for this practical cabinetmaker was a man of
independent if not original ideas, and his work bears a strong stamp
of individuality. Heppelwhite died in 1786, and the “Cabinet-maker and
Upholsterer’s Guide,” published by his widow and partners in 1788,
shows us in the form of a trade catalogue much of the spirit and
quality of his work.

[Illustration: CHIPPENDALE TABLE

_This table shows strong Chinese influence._]


HEPPELWHITE--THE EXPONENT OF ELEGANCE

[Illustration: HEPPELWHITE CORNER CABINET]

The most characteristic designs of Heppelwhite are his chair backs.
These are commonly shield or oval shaped, with open center splats,
in the center of which were often introduced the ostrich plumes of
the Prince of Wales. Another form of back frequently employed by
Heppelwhite was that with slightly curved sides and strongly bowed top,
known as the “camel back.”

The legs of Heppelwhite’s chairs are almost always tapering and
square in sections and end in a spade foot. The proportions of these
chairs give an effect of extreme elegance and refinement. They seem
almost fragile; but the material is disposed with such skill and the
workmanship is so excellent that in reality they are far stronger than
might appear.

[Illustration: EXAMPLES OF HEPPELWHITE CHAIRS]

From the time of the Middle Ages the buffet has existed as an important
article of furniture; but to Heppelwhite is due the credit of
perfecting the sideboard in its present English form. He combined the
pedestal cellaret and side table of Robert Adam in one structure, and
effected a union of utility with elegance, which he executed in many
pleasing designs of bow and serpentine front.

To Heppelwhite we must also give credit for the most refined and
tasteful use of inlay and of veneers to be found in English furniture.
On the doors of wardrobes and on the front of drawers he employed
veneers of the beautiful curl mahogany that came into favor about
1760, and on the front of his solid mahogany tables, sideboards, and
bookcases he substituted for carving the inlay of low-toned colored
woods in the form of lines and narrow bands and other ornamental
motives.

[Illustration: HEPPELWHITE COMMODE]


SHERATON--THE PURIST

The last of the three great cabinetmakers represents the culmination
of the classic spirit derived both from the brothers Adam and the
French Louis XVI style. Sheraton’s productions, or rather his designs,
depicted in the “Cabinet-maker and Upholsterer’s Drawing-Book,” have
little of the vigor and strength of Chippendale’s work; but they are
always characterized by delicacy and refinement.

[Illustration: EXAMPLES OF SHERATON CHAIRS]

Sheraton designed furniture both in mahogany and in satinwood,
decorated by inlay and by painting, and it is with this last style, the
introduction of which was largely due to the popularity of the gifted
young artist Angélique Kauffmann, that he is particularly identified.
His work in mahogany is characterized by simplicity of form and by the
tasteful use of inlay, in which respect he was perhaps the equal of
Heppelwhite.

His chair backs are almost always based upon the straight line, and,
although sometimes made petty by the introduction of inappropriate
classic ornament, they exhibit on the whole much skill and refinement
in composition. In the legs of chairs and tables he almost invariably
used turned and tapering supports, which were frequently decorated by
reeding. In the sides and often the backs of his chairs he reintroduced
the vogue of canework, which had not appeared in fashionable furniture
since the seventeenth century.

Sheraton’s satinwood furniture took the form mainly of commodes or
bureaus, small writing desks, toilet tables, and other lighter articles
for the boudoir. The daintiness and elegance of some of these pieces
decorated by the brush of Angélique Kauffmann or Pergolesi challenge
comparison with some of the exquisite furniture made during the reign
of Louis XVI, and they mark the final culmination of English furniture
before its degeneration into the mediocrity of later times.

[Illustration: SHERATON SIDEBOARD]


SUPPLEMENTARY READING

    French Furniture                                           _A. Saglio_
    A History of English Furniture                        _Percy Macquoid_
    French Furniture in the Eighteenth Century                _Lady Dilke_
    Colonial Furniture in America                  _Luke Vincent Lockwood_
    English Furniture of the Eighteenth Century        _Herbert Cescinsky_
    Furniture                                           _Esther Singleton_
    French and English Furniture                        _Esther Singleton_
    The Furniture Designs of Thomas Chippendale            _J. Munro Bell_




[Illustration: ANTIQUE CHEST--THIRTEENTH CENTURY]




_FURNITURE AND ITS MAKERS_

_Old Furniture_

ONE


People have always used furniture; but the kind of furniture we use
today is of comparatively recent origin. Wood, ivory, precious stones,
bronze, silver, and gold have been used from earliest times in the
construction and for the decoration of furniture, but modern furniture
is a development of little more than four centuries.

Furniture has always varied in kind and style, according to the needs
and customs of its users. There are few examples left of really ancient
furniture. This is due partly to the perishable materials used in its
making, and partly to the fact that the people of olden times had
little furniture of any kind. Even the poorest home of today is better
supplied with some household appliances than the most aristocratic
house of splendid Egypt, tasteful Greece, or luxurious Rome.

And in the long period between the destruction of these ancient
civilizations and the Renaissance the making of furniture developed
very little. The rulers of Egypt were as well housed as the early
kings of England. Household furnishings were the privilege of the
great alone. No person of mean degree could or would dare to have used
a chair--one of the commonest objects in every modern home. Active
people, as they were, living much in the open air, they needed but
benches on which to sit at meals, and beds on which to sleep. Our
luxuries were not only unknown, but unnecessary to them.

The Egyptians used wooden furniture, carved and gilded; they also used
chests in which to keep things. The tables and couches of the Assyrians
were inlaid with ivory and precious metals. The wood used was mostly
cedar and ebony. Solomon’s bed was of cedar of Lebanon. The furniture
of Greece was oriental in form, and from this the Romans absorbed many
ideas. The Roman tables were of marbles or rare woods. They used gold
and silver plentifully, even cooking utensils being made of these
precious metals.

Most medieval furniture of Italian make was richly gilded and painted.
In the north of Europe carved oak was used to a greater extent. The
feudal halls were furnished with benches carved and paneled. Chests
of oak or Italian cypress were used as receptacles for clothes and
tapestries. The oak coffer with wrought iron bands shown in the picture
is of French make, of the latter half of the thirteenth century.

The Renaissance made a great change in furniture making. Cabinets and
paneling were done in the outlines of palaces and temples. In Florence,
Rome, Venice, and Milan there began on a large scale the manufacture
of sumptuous cabinets, tables, chairs, and chests. Spain, France, and
Germany soon followed the fashion, and in England Henry VIII greatly
encouraged the art of furniture making.

Then came the great period of furniture, the eighteenth century. From
being massive and exceedingly scarce and costly, furniture became
light, plentiful, and cheap.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 30, SERIAL No. 30




[Illustration: LOUIS XIV ARMCHAIR]




_FURNITURE AND ITS MAKERS_

_Boulle and Marot_

TWO


There was no limit to the prices a reckless and profligate court was
willing to pay for luxurious beauty during the sumptuous, extravagant
reign of Louis the Magnificent of France. For much that was most
splendid and beautiful in furniture making at this period stands the
name of Charles André Boulle. His imagination and skill were given full
play, and he proved equal to the demands made upon him.

Boulle was a remarkable man. In a court whose only thought was of
pleasure and display, he realized that his furniture must not only
excel all others in richness, beauty, and cost; it must also be both
comfortable and useful. He was appointed cabinet maker to the Dauphin,
the heir to the throne of France. This distinction, together with his
own tastes, led him to copy some of the manners and bearing of his rich
customers.

He was an aristocrat among furniture makers. He spent the greater part
of his large fortune in filling his workshop with works of art. His
warehouses were packed with precious woods and finished and unfinished
pieces of magnificent furniture. In his own rooms were priceless works
of art, the collection of a lifetime--gems, medals, drawings, and
paintings, which included forty-eight drawings by Raphael.

Boulle’s ruin came in a single night. When he was seventy-eight years
old all his property was destroyed by fire. His loss was not only of
fortune, but of reputation as well; for when he was down and out he
resorted to tricks and questionable dealings which brought him many
lawsuits. He died in debt and poverty, a discredited and broken man.

The English court vied with France in its extravagance, and heaped
honors and wealth on the man who, like Boulle, in France, was foremost
among designers of furniture in that country. The authorities on fine
furniture frequently speak of Marot’s work in connection with that of
the great Boulle. Daniel Marot was the son of Jean Marot, an architect
and engraver. After he went to England with William III he principally
concentrated his talent upon the adornment of Hampton Court Palace.
Much of the furniture at Hampton Court bears unmistakable traces of
his authorship. At Windsor Castle also there is a silver table that is
attributed to him.

Marot’s work differs from that of Boulle in that he inserted, in
medallion form, pictorial subjects in a heavy framework of ornament.
In other pieces the inlay took the form of geometrical, floral, and
animal patterns, combined with the warmer and more beautiful tints of
the exotic woods. The whole was marked by an unsurpassed degree of
excellence in workmanship.

Besides furniture, Marot designed carved chimney pieces, panels for
walls, ceilings, and wall brackets. He was also famous as a designer of
gold and silver plate, and he even made tea urns and cream jugs.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 30, SERIAL No. 30




[Illustration: LOUIS XV SIDEBOARD--MADE BY RIESENER]




_FURNITURE AND ITS MAKERS_

_J. H. Riesener_

THREE


The early years of the life of Jean Henri Riesener would seem to
indicate that he was born under a lucky star. But long before his
death, at the age of seventy-one, in the first decade of the nineteenth
century, his star had set. Before the outbreak of the French Revolution
he commanded enormous prices for his work. One small table that he
constructed is said to have been sold for more than a thousand dollars.
Yet in his old age he was only saved from utter ruin by his son, a
portrait painter.

Œben, the famous and successful furniture maker, under whom Riesener
served as an apprentice, died and left, besides a young and handsome
widow, one of the largest workshops in Paris and a large fortune. The
young man promptly married the widow, and upon her death, six years
later, came into possession of both the property and the fortune. Three
years later he married the daughter of a citizen of Paris; but again
his marriage proved of short duration, for after a few stormy years of
wedded life he took refuge in the new divorce laws of the country, and
returned again to the state of single blessedness.

Œben, his master, had been commissioned by King Louis XV of France
to make a bureau. King Louis was called the “well beloved,” although
he was really hated by the majority of his subjects. This bureau
contributed greatly to Riesener’s fame; for its construction took three
years, and, Œben having died in the meantime, his pupil completed it.

The massive bronze doors of this royal bureau were ornamented
with elaborate and intricately modeled figures, and the whole was
fashioned after a complete and perfect miniature model. The degree
of craftsmanship that was brought to bear upon this historical piece
of furniture was of such a character that a second bureau, built
similarly, was begun and completed by a competitor before the original
was finished.

Riesener became a greater artist than his teacher, Œben, and was
recognized as one of the leading furniture makers of his time. His
great activity is shown by the quantity and elaborate detail of the
furniture he made.

At the beginning of the French Revolution evil days came upon Riesener.
Those wealthy customers who did not flee and escaped the guillotine
were made bankrupt. In 1793 he held a sale of his prized collection of
furniture; but he was forced to buy most of it back himself. A little
later he tried again to realize some money on the furniture; but this
also was a failure.

His son, who had joined the army, returned to Paris and saved the aged
furniture maker from starvation.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 30, SERIAL No. 30




[Illustration: INTERIOR SHOWING THREE CHIPPENDALE CHAIRS]




_FURNITURE AND ITS MAKERS_

_Thomas Chippendale_

FOUR


A young art student came to a furniture shop in London and the talk
was of beauty of line, the dignity of proportion, and the introduction
of mahogany in the manufacture of furniture. The art student afterward
became Sir Joshua Reynolds, the world famed painter. The furniture
maker was Thomas Chippendale, known as “King of the Eighteenth Century
Furniture Designers.” And to these early friendly talks and arguments
Chippendale attributes his reputation as a master of line and a genius
of proportion.

Before the time of Chippendale most of the furniture was made of the
heavier native woods, such as walnut or oak. Mahogany made a powerful
appeal to him, because of its highly polished surface and the exquisite
beauty of the wood itself; for the young cabinet maker who came up to
London from Worcestershire had a passionate love of beauty and he was
a master workman. From his father, who had achieved considerable local
fame, he inherited this love, and he had learned how to make the wood
carvings that are characteristic of his designs.

After a fire he converted four adjacent dwelling houses into a shop,
which was situated on St. Martins Lane, in the fashionable section of
London; and because he protested against the amount of his taxes it
seems probable he was prosperous. Moreover, he belonged to the Society
of Arts, with Gibbon the historian, Richardson the novelist, Dr.
Johnson the lexicographer, and Horace Walpole the politician. If you
add to this that he married in 1748 and died in 1779, there is summed
up practically all there is known of Thomas Chippendale himself.

Chippendale made beautiful furniture. He was recognized by both the
nobility and gentry, not only as an authority on the subject, but as
an artist. He was probably better known as a designer of chairs than
of any other form of furniture. Chippendale was familiar with artistic
designs in Japan, Italy, and Spain, and was ready always to take ideas
from the humble as well as the great, as is shown from the fact that
subscribers to his book, “The Gentleman and Cabinet-maker’s Director,”
range from the Duke of Northumberland to a local bricklayer. A large
part of his reputation is attributed to this book, which was not so
much a guide to his finished productions as an outline of the designs
he would like to make. And these designs have served as a guide to
furniture makers ever since.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 30, SERIAL No. 30




[Illustration: LOUIS XVI CHAIR, WITH BEAUVAIS TAPESTRY]




_FURNITURE AND ITS MAKERS_

_Thomas Sheraton_

FIVE


At forty years of age Thomas Sheraton was a poverty-pinched journeyman
cabinet maker and Baptist preacher in Stockton-on-Tees. Then in 1790
he went to London, where he found even a greater poverty, but where he
made for himself as a designer of furniture a name that will last as
long as the world loves beautiful things. The fifteen remaining years
of his life were tragically sad.

Sheraton’s knowledge was gained through years of hardship and
privation. He lived to see his chosen art reach its zenith, and then to
see it fall away. He had scarce perfected his creations when they were
overwhelmed by a wave of bad taste that swept much beauty from English
furniture.

When Sheraton reached London he hadn’t enough money to set up shop,
much less to employ skilled workmen. So, instead of making furniture,
he wrote about it, varying this occasionally by writing sermons or
tracts. He made little money, but many enemies, for he had a bitter
tongue.

Adam Black, afterward the famous publisher, was then a printer’s
apprentice, and lived for a time in Sheraton’s humble home. “The night
I arrived,” Black wrote, “there were but two cups and saucers, one of
which I used, Sheraton’s wife sharing her young daughter’s porridge
bowl.”

Black published Sheraton’s “Encyclopedia of Furniture.” This brought
Sheraton some fame, but little food. The big work showed the great
range and variety of Sheraton’s art.

We love his furniture for its finely curved surfaces, graceful sweeps
of sideboards and cabinets reflecting the light. Aside from its beauty,
Sheraton’s furniture was essentially practical--sometimes in most
original fashion. For example, he invented a summer bed, divided in the
center so as to give a greater circulation of air. There was likewise
a hollow-front sideboard that became popular for the ease with which
a butler could reach across for a stray glass or piece of china ware.
His “conversation chair” was designed for the beaux of Georgian times,
whose coat-tails were too costly to be sat upon. The proper position
in this chair was for the sitter to face the back of the chair, with
his arm resting on the top rail, so that his coat-tails could hang. The
so-called “Pouch Table,” much beloved today by neat housewives, was
Sheraton’s invention. It was a work table with a pouch of silk on each
side.

Besides his great book, Sheraton got up a handbook for the benefit of
his brother craftsmen, in which he gave in a helpful manner minute
descriptions of his various pieces. The spirit that prompted him to do
this was the finest thing in Sheraton’s nature. He had his faults. He
was narrow, self-centered, and bitterly resentful of the success of
others, but he believed it to be a man’s duty to give to the world the
benefit of his full knowledge, and he sacrificed himself through life
to do this.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 30, SERIAL No. 30




[Illustration: LOUIS XVI CABINET]




_FURNITURE AND ITS MAKERS_

_George Heppelwhite_

SIX


George Heppelwhite was one of the great names in furniture making.
His wife published after his death a book, “The Cabinet Maker and
Upholsterer’s Guide, or Repository of Design for Every Article of
Household Furniture in the Newest and Most Approved Taste,” on which
his reputation rests. This book went through three editions in 1788,
two years after the author’s own death.

The designs in his book are characterized by comfort rather than
artificiality. With this is combined great technical excellence and
extreme lightness and durability. Curiously, however, these designs are
not all of equal value. Some are as good as the best work of any era,
while others are most commonplace.

Although even at that time tea cost five dollars a pound, its use
had become very popular throughout England. Heppelwhite introduced
many articles that had to do with the tea service. Many peculiarly
constructed and choice urn stands, tea trays, chests, and caddies are
attributed to him.

Heppelwhite’s furniture had an interesting characteristic. The legs
tapered delicately on the inside faces only, and were finished with a
square foot. This gave the impression of grit and power to otherwise
fragile furniture.

There were several stock designs, or ornaments, of which this furniture
maker made frequent use. He was particularly fond of inserting ovals in
the backs of his chairs. Frequently a carved ear of corn was used as
a decoration. Heppelwhite also made abundant use of a Prince of Wales
feather in delicate carving, combined with an inlay of colored woods.
This use of the royal plume was attributed to his loyalty to the Prince
of Wales. It was conclusive proof of the popularity of the Prince’s
party when the illness of George III caused such national strife.

The fact that Heppelwhite was accused by his enemies of plagiarism does
not detract a bit from his real position. It shows rather that, like
all real artists, he remained a student until the close of his career.
He never disdained to profit by the experience and teachings of others,
even those less eminent than himself.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 30, SERIAL No. 30





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mentor: Furniture and its Makers,
Vol. 1, Num. 30, Serial No. 30, by C. R. Richards

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MENTOR: FURNITURE AND ITS MAKERS ***

***** This file should be named 49904-0.txt or 49904-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/9/0/49904/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

